[Unknown]: What does it mean to be free?
[Amit Varma]: What do individual rights mean and where do they come from?
[Amit Varma]: What values should we use to guide our behavior?
[Amit Varma]: What is the relationship between citizens and the state?
[Amit Varma]: Why is taxation equal to part-time slavery?
[Unknown]: What does it mean to be libertarian?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This is a special episode in the sense that the conversation you will hear was not recorded
[Amit Varma]: for this podcast and I am the interviewee, not the interviewer.
[Amit Varma]: About a month ago, I appeared as a guest on the Pragati podcast.
[Amit Varma]: I air it in an online magazine of commentary called Pragati at thinkpragati.com and one
[Amit Varma]: of our podcasts, hosted by my colleagues Pawan Srinath and Hamsini Hariharan, is called the
[Amit Varma]: Pragati podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I am known as a libertarian, although I try to avoid labels these days because they
[Amit Varma]: have all become debased and caricatured.
[Amit Varma]: But when Pawan invited me to talk about my libertarianism, I figured that it's a good
[Amit Varma]: chance to explain what my first principles are and where I get my values from.
[Amit Varma]: Forget all the isms.
[Amit Varma]: My beliefs revolve around respect for the autonomy of other people.
[Amit Varma]: And it all boils down to one word, consent.
[Amit Varma]: I elaborate on that in the discussion, but before we go there, I'd like to apologize
[Amit Varma]: to all listeners of the Scene and the Unseen who have already heard that episode of the
[Amit Varma]: Pragati podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Our data shows that there is not much overlap between listeners of the two shows and the
[Amit Varma]: Scene and the Unseen gets a lot more listeners at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought it's a good chance to introduce the Pragati podcast to you guys, as well as
[Amit Varma]: put this conversation up.
[Amit Varma]: So without much further ado, here's a chat I had with Pawan.
[Guest]: Amit, thanks for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan, thanks for having me on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Our roles are reversed, you might note, since I've interviewed you so many times for the
[Guest]: Scene and the Unseen and now it's the other way around.
[Guest]: Yes, it's a pleasure to have you on the Pragati podcast.
[Guest]: I think you were there on the first episode and then now you're back after quite a few
[Amit Varma]: episodes, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but I was only ever a guest host, never a guest per se, so be nice to me.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: So Amit, tell me, are you a liberal or a libertarian?
[Guest]: What description do you prefer?
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, I could call myself both, but I don't like using any of those terms
[Amit Varma]: now.
[Amit Varma]: The thing with liberal is that I am what you would in the 19th century have called a liberal
[Amit Varma]: and in Europe still in the European sense, I'd be a liberal.
[Amit Varma]: That is today called a classical liberal because the term liberal has mutated meaning so often
[Amit Varma]: and means something completely different, if not the opposite in some places.
[Amit Varma]: And classical liberalism really started with during the Enlightenment with John Locke.
[Amit Varma]: And that's really the foundation of libertarianism as well, that they're kind of very close together.
[Amit Varma]: And I think both classical liberalism and libertarianism fit me, but I don't like using
[Amit Varma]: either of those terms anymore.
[Guest]: OK, but it would be safe to say that you are in favor of more and more liberty.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, but, you know, let me let me indulge me for a moment and I'll just elaborate on
[Amit Varma]: why I don't like even the word libertarian, because, you know, people talk of libertarianism
[Amit Varma]: as, you know, just another ism where you have a certain worldview and a way of looking at
[Amit Varma]: the world and you believe in certain things which, you know, other people believe in other
[Amit Varma]: things and maybe they can be falsified.
[Amit Varma]: And what you think of facts right now might not be facts tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: But none of that really fits where I come from.
[Amit Varma]: Like for me, it's not a way of looking at the world, but adherence to a certain value.
[Amit Varma]: And that value can really be summed up in one word.
[Amit Varma]: And that word is consent.
[Amit Varma]: So all of libertarianism or all of what I know it to be or all of what I believe in
[Amit Varma]: eventually circles round and comes down to the word consent.
[Guest]: Okay, expand on that a little, because usually when we talk about libertarianism or liberty,
[Guest]: I think people come back to the idea of freedom, but you seem to be reframing it as consent.
[Amit Varma]: Freedom also works.
[Amit Varma]: But again, freedom is a sort of a nebulous thing and people define it in various different
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: While consent to me seems to encapsulate it perfectly and there's really no perverse way
[Amit Varma]: of using it.
[Amit Varma]: But let me then go back, go back to first principles.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, you can come to libertarianism through two parts.
[Amit Varma]: I'll take you through both of both of those parts.
[Amit Varma]: And the first part begins by going back to first principles as articulated by John Locke
[Amit Varma]: during the Enlightenment, where John Locke spoke about what we now call in brief, the
[Amit Varma]: right to self ownership.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is part of a body of what is called natural rights, where people believe that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, these are rights that we are all born with, and no one may take them away from us
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it's perfectly fine if you don't believe in natural rights, if you believe that rights
[Amit Varma]: have no meaning in and of themselves, but are instead a system that are given by society
[Amit Varma]: to its members and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you don't believe in natural rights, the fact of the matter is that you have to
[Amit Varma]: have some framework of rights, which is agreed upon by society or states at large, and what
[Amit Varma]: should that framework be?
[Amit Varma]: And for me, that framework corresponds pretty exactly with John Locke's articulation of
[Amit Varma]: natural rights.
[Amit Varma]: So so let me go through what that is, Locke believed that the most basic right that everyone
[Amit Varma]: is sort of born with is the right to self ownership.
[Amit Varma]: Because when you're born, you're not you're not owned by anyone, you're not owned by your
[Amit Varma]: parents, you're not owned by society at large, or whatever, all of that makes no sense.
[Amit Varma]: You own yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And he framed that as a right.
[Amit Varma]: And to him, all legitimate rights arise from that your right to self ownership exists as
[Amit Varma]: long as you respect the corresponding rights of others, and all rights which arise out
[Amit Varma]: of self ownership.
[Amit Varma]: For example, your thoughts are yours alone.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, when you express them the right to free speech, that comes out of the right
[Amit Varma]: to self ownership.
[Amit Varma]: If you mix your labor with something, you get the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: And that again arises out of the right to self ownership.
[Amit Varma]: And all these kinds of rights are called negative rights, in the sense that to respect these
[Amit Varma]: rights, somebody has to not do something to you.
[Amit Varma]: So your right to free speech means that no one can shut you up, your right to property
[Amit Varma]: means that no one can steal from you, which is why these are called negative rights.
[Amit Varma]: And again, rights is one of those terms which has been sort of become corrupted over the
[Amit Varma]: years because today rights, you know, there's another class of rights taking off from Isaiah
[Amit Varma]: Berlin, which are positive rights, he spoke of negative and positive freedoms, pretty
[Amit Varma]: much the same thing, positive rights, where people talk about the right to food or the
[Amit Varma]: right to education, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And all of those rights are actually entitlements.
[Amit Varma]: And giving them the language of rights is problematic, because the only way you can
[Amit Varma]: fulfill a positive right is by infringing someone's negative right.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you say that XYZ has a right to food, and therefore the government has
[Amit Varma]: to provide him food, to get him that food, the government then has to get the money for
[Amit Varma]: the food from someone and infringe his negative right.
[Amit Varma]: So while it may be desirable that everyone should eat and everyone should get educated,
[Amit Varma]: framing it as a right is problematic, but I've kind of taken a sort of a digression.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll go back to what I was, I'll go back to negative rights and
[Guest]: So Amit, just to clarify on this, so if you're saying that you have a right to life, a negative
[Guest]: version of that right would be that no one has the right to take away your life.
[Guest]: But a positive version of it could be that in order to live your life, you might need
[Guest]: a few things and the government or the state might provide them.
[Amit Varma]: Bang on, precisely, precisely.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a very good clarification.
[Amit Varma]: All negative rights imply that nobody should be able to do anything.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the right to life means no one should be able to kill you.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the problem arises that if you claim these rights, you know, you can have a society
[Amit Varma]: where it's not as if everyone will agree to live this way, someone.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the classical liberal view is that someone needs to be there to protect
[Amit Varma]: your right.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the government or the state per se.
[Amit Varma]: And the state needs to exist only to the extent that it protects negative rights and does
[Amit Varma]: nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost what I call the liberal paradox, that on one hand, you say that your right
[Amit Varma]: should not be infringed.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, your rights cannot be protected unless they are infringed to
[Amit Varma]: at least some extent, which is the extent that the state needs to exist and take taxes
[Amit Varma]: from you, which is which is the origin of sort of the classical liberal construct of
[Amit Varma]: the state, which is called the night watchman state, for example, that this is all they
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: They protect the rights of their citizens, and otherwise they let their citizens interact
[Amit Varma]: in whatever ways and they don't interfere unless somebody's rights are being infringed.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So this night watchman formulation is very interesting for me.
[Guest]: So can you expand on that metaphor?
[Guest]: So what does a night watchman version of the state look like?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So a literal night watchman is someone who protects something, right.
[Amit Varma]: So a night watchman version of the state would basically be the police and the defense.
[Amit Varma]: They would protect you against external threats with defense and the police, which would have
[Amit Varma]: a monopoly on violence and would make sure that nobody's rights are infringed and there
[Amit Varma]: would be a justice system, you know, making sure that the rule of law means something
[Amit Varma]: so that if someone does infringe someone's rights, you have a way of dealing with that.
[Amit Varma]: You have a way of punishing the offender and, you know, reducing incentives for further
[Amit Varma]: offenses to happen and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Now, a lot of people would say that, no, no, no, no.
[Amit Varma]: But the government's job is, you know, education is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: The government should provide education or roads are a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: The government should do roads or statues are a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: We should have statues of great leaders and the government should build that.
[Amit Varma]: But the important thing to note is that the government is not a benign presence which
[Amit Varma]: exists on its own.
[Amit Varma]: Every act of government is an act of violence.
[Amit Varma]: Everything that a government does is funded by money forcibly taken from individuals.
[Amit Varma]: Now, think of it this way, we take the government and therefore the resultant taxes for granted.
[Amit Varma]: But if you're being taxed 30 percent of your income through direct plus indirect taxes,
[Amit Varma]: what that basically means is that if you're giving one third of your income away in tax,
[Amit Varma]: you're working one third of the year, four months for the government, for four months
[Amit Varma]: you're effectively a slave.
[Amit Varma]: So all taxation is really part time slavery, which we take for granted.
[Amit Varma]: And the liberal paradox is that to be able to live as free citizens, we accept a certain
[Amit Varma]: amount of this infringement on our property and this part time slavery because, hey, we,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that's almost a necessary evil.
[Amit Varma]: But then the question is that everything that the government does is at that cost.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we should think about it very carefully.
[Amit Varma]: It's it's not enough.
[Amit Varma]: Pavan, if you were to tell me that, hey, you know, Amit, we should build a statue in Bangalore
[Amit Varma]: of so-and-so, a great hero of mine.
[Amit Varma]: And my answer to that would be that if you think that the government should build a statue,
[Amit Varma]: then do it with your money.
[Amit Varma]: Why force me to part with mine and not just me?
[Amit Varma]: Every citizen of this country pays indirect taxes.
[Amit Varma]: Even a beggar at a traffic signal will, you know, buy some salt or buy some soap at some
[Amit Varma]: point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And they're paying taxes on that.
[Amit Varma]: So to build your statue or to do whatever your vanity project is to fulfill your values,
[Amit Varma]: you are taking money out forcibly from somebody else.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and the morality of that is questionable.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason we can do this is that there is a disconnect in our minds.
[Amit Varma]: We think that we don't realize or it's not explicit that everything that the government
[Amit Varma]: does is at the cost of money taken from us and at the cost of our freedom.
[Guest]: Amit, I understand the security angle, right?
[Guest]: So the government has to have sufficient resources to maintain a monopoly over violence.
[Guest]: But what about other things like public goods?
[Guest]: I understand your argument that if the government wants to build a statue or if they want to
[Guest]: do a handout, if they want to make a scheme of some sort, they do end up taking taxes.
[Guest]: But what about pure public goods?
[Guest]: For example, connectivity, you know, clean air, there are lots of things that governments
[Guest]: inevitably will end up having a role in playing, right?
[Guest]: Because markets are not necessarily very good at providing for these things.
[Guest]: People don't necessarily want to pay for something like this and want to be a free rider.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I think everyone can agree that look, a statue is a waste of money.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone can also agree that there are certain public goods, which it's hard to envisage
[Amit Varma]: them coming about through markets.
[Amit Varma]: So I would actually argue there's no such thing as a market failure if you allow markets
[Amit Varma]: to function.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, I think rather than take a hard stand on this and say that, no,
[Amit Varma]: the government should only do this, what I prefer to do is I prefer to get into any kind
[Amit Varma]: of discourse with the common understanding that let's understand that every government
[Amit Varma]: action has a cost.
[Amit Varma]: And then once you recognize the cost, then you can debate the benefits because then you
[Amit Varma]: are taking those counterfactuals into account.
[Amit Varma]: And you're saying that, okay, so if the government spends its money on XYZ, it has a cost.
[Amit Varma]: This is a cost.
[Amit Varma]: And once you keep the cost in mind, then you can have a reasoned conversation and reasonable
[Amit Varma]: people can disagree on the extent of what the government should do.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody agrees no statue.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody agrees that yes, police, but should there, for example, be more airports?
[Amit Varma]: And that's something where you can have a reasoned argument.
[Amit Varma]: But all those arguments should have at its basis, the understanding that there is a cost
[Guest]: to any government action.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: But you know, the sometimes I wonder if we can look at the government in a slightly different
[Guest]: way in that it is a another institution, which is a mechanism of cooperation in society.
[Guest]: And so government is one type of a cooperative system with different roles and responsibilities.
[Guest]: A corporation would be something else.
[Guest]: So how do they conflict with the freedoms of an individual?
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of the times your employer is also infringing on your freedoms quite a lot,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: So here's the deal.
[Amit Varma]: First of all, I agree with your articulation of government as part of, you know, that whole
[Amit Varma]: thing that helps society to cooperate.
[Amit Varma]: But insofar as it maintains a rule of law, the difference is in what is voluntary and
[Amit Varma]: what is not.
[Amit Varma]: And here again, like, you know, eventually by the end of this episode, I'll come to why
[Amit Varma]: consent.
[Amit Varma]: But the cardinal sin for any classical liberal or libertarian is therefore coercion.
[Amit Varma]: Now the thing is, when I join a company, I join a company voluntarily.
[Amit Varma]: It has certain rules and regulations.
[Amit Varma]: I join according to that.
[Amit Varma]: I promise to abide by that.
[Amit Varma]: If my employer insists that I stay in office between nine to five, then he is not infringing
[Amit Varma]: on my freedom.
[Amit Varma]: I have agreed to that.
[Amit Varma]: And if he forces me to do something that is beyond the terms of my contract with the company,
[Amit Varma]: then I have recourse.
[Amit Varma]: I can sue.
[Amit Varma]: Or I should be able to sue.
[Amit Varma]: In India, the rule of law is so bad that often the legal recourse can become meaningless.
[Amit Varma]: But I should be able to sue.
[Amit Varma]: It's a voluntary interaction.
[Amit Varma]: With the government, on the other hand, nothing is voluntary.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing is coercive, and the whole approach of the government is not that we are here
[Amit Varma]: to serve you.
[Amit Varma]: We are here to protect your rights.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you are our masters.
[Amit Varma]: That's not the approach of the government.
[Amit Varma]: And especially in India, we take granted this Maibab government that rules over us.
[Amit Varma]: They are our rulers.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what happened in 1947 was we replaced one bunch of rulers with another bunch of
[Amit Varma]: rulers.
[Amit Varma]: Only the color of the skin was different.
[Amit Varma]: And we went on like that.
[Amit Varma]: And I would argue in many ways, the bunch of rulers who replaced them, and I'm not talking
[Amit Varma]: about specific political parties, because every single political party that's ever been
[Amit Varma]: in government has this approach.
[Amit Varma]: But in many ways, post-independent Indian governments have been far more oppressive
[Amit Varma]: than the British were.
[Amit Varma]: For example, the salt tax that Gandhi protested when he went on the Dandi March was a fraction
[Amit Varma]: of what it is today in independent India.
[Guest]: So fair enough.
[Guest]: But how do I put this?
[Guest]: It is like, how do we look at the system where, look, it is not possible to engineer a government
[Guest]: where consent is there through and through, right?
[Guest]: For example, we are born into this world.
[Guest]: So say there is a constitution, there's some rule of law.
[Guest]: As we are born, it's not like we can consent to the existing state of affairs and say that
[Guest]: we have opted into this ecosystem, right?
[Guest]: So everyone sort of starts without consent.
[Guest]: So how do you, how do we engineer this right?
[Amit Varma]: That's absolutely right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, whenever people accuse me of chasing some libertarian utopia, I have to
[Amit Varma]: point out that no, I'm not chasing a utopia in the sense that I'm not saying that we should
[Amit Varma]: be in this, that the world should suddenly turn into this ideal world where everybody
[Amit Varma]: has complete consent and no rights are infringed.
[Amit Varma]: The fact of the matter is that we are born without having a choice in the matter, in
[Amit Varma]: this country, in this current system that we are in, and we have to then negotiate that.
[Amit Varma]: And as citizens who care about freedom, it's then important to raise our voice against
[Amit Varma]: any kind of injustice in any context.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, as a writer, I don't, in my columns, try to give utopian solutions.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, I try to move one step at a time, like, you know, when I propose, for example,
[Amit Varma]: a reform or a public policy, I'll always try to make sure that the reform I'm proposing
[Amit Varma]: either reduces the role of government, or if it keeps the role of government the same,
[Amit Varma]: it makes it more efficient by introducing market mechanisms, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And so you've got to kind of do this fight one step at a time, you can't just withdraw
[Amit Varma]: from the world and go into a cave and, you know, that doesn't work.
[Amit Varma]: This is a world we are in, and it is our duty as citizens and as individuals, it is our
[Amit Varma]: duty to ourselves to constantly keep fighting for our freedom and keep reminding others
[Amit Varma]: that we are not free.
[Amit Varma]: And that's important.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, that this is just sort of one aspect of it.
[Amit Varma]: Like I said, that when I arrive at consent, or when I arrive at libertarianism, you can
[Amit Varma]: arrive at it from two directions.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, tell us about the second one.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you can arrive at it from two directions.
[Amit Varma]: And one direction, of course, is the one I just articulated, which is where you're coming
[Amit Varma]: at it from first principles and the right to self ownership and so on, whether or not
[Amit Varma]: you regard that as a natural right.
[Amit Varma]: But the other direction is the direction of outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I'm not a utilitarian, I don't like utilitarianism, because you can really rationalize anything
[Amit Varma]: with it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, utilitarianism, I think, runs up against Hayek's knowledge problem.
[Amit Varma]: And to put that in simple language, utilitarianism means that you judge events by their outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem is that outcomes are always messy.
[Amit Varma]: Every action has unintended consequences, you never know what they're going to be.
[Amit Varma]: And utilitarianism can be used to justify absolutely anything.
[Amit Varma]: But if you take a broad sweep of history, and you look at what freedom does, I would
[Amit Varma]: argue that freedom leads to the best outcomes for society, in every sense, but not just
[Amit Varma]: for the economy, but for cultures.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason for that is something that is counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we evolved, humans evolved in prehistoric times when they lived in small tribes in times
[Amit Varma]: of scarcity, and we evolved to instinctively think of the world in zero sum ways.
[Amit Varma]: So if I gain something, you necessarily lose that something because there's only so much
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the truth is that the world is positive sum, in the sense that, you know, the example
[Amit Varma]: I keep giving so much so that people who read me probably find it tiresome by now.
[Amit Varma]: But I cite the libertarian thinker John Stossel, he had written a column where he spoke about
[Amit Varma]: something called the double thank you moment, which is basically this, let's say I go to
[Amit Varma]: Starbucks to buy a cup of coffee, which costs 180 bucks at all Americano I have, I buy the
[Amit Varma]: cup of coffee.
[Amit Varma]: And as I hand them the money, they say thank you.
[Amit Varma]: And as they hand me the coffee, I say thank you.
[Amit Varma]: And both of us mean it.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason is that both of us benefited, it's not that only one party benefited.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a double thank you moment.
[Amit Varma]: And every voluntary interaction in the world, whether economic or monetary or otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: every voluntary interaction between two people takes place when both people benefit.
[Amit Varma]: No one has to lose for the other one to win.
[Amit Varma]: In this case, I value the coffee more than the money I paid for it.
[Amit Varma]: They value the money more than the coffee that they made for me.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, what happens is that the more you allow these voluntary interactions and
[Amit Varma]: more people gain, this is both true socially, where you ideally want a lot of free speech
[Amit Varma]: where people can interact with each other in various ways and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And also in terms of economics, where you have the more of these voluntary transactions
[Amit Varma]: you have, the more little positive, some games which lead to benefits for everybody.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how economies grow, countries grow, cities grow, which is why that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's almost a direct correlation over 250 years that as free markets spread across the
[Amit Varma]: world, prosperity spread in exactly that way.
[Amit Varma]: You know, this is why cities, for example, are the most prosperous places in any country,
[Amit Varma]: giving a lie to the absurd notion that population density is a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: Population density is a great thing because it leads to more such voluntary interactions,
[Amit Varma]: larger networks, more value for everybody being created.
[Amit Varma]: And the corollary of this is that the more the government interferes in such voluntary
[Amit Varma]: interactions, the more it harms society.
[Amit Varma]: So when a government interferes in the free market, for example, it's bad in two aspects.
[Amit Varma]: One of course is a moral aspect, which I spoke about earlier, that if two consenting adults
[Amit Varma]: should be able to do whatever they want with each other, that should hold true, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's in the bedroom or in the marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: It's morally wrong to interfere between those two consenting adults.
[Amit Varma]: And the second argument is a consequential argument, the utilitarian argument that you're
[Amit Varma]: reducing the amount of value in the world when you do that, which is why government
[Amit Varma]: regulation of markets is so problematic and always counterproductive.
[Guest]: Thanks for saying that, Amit, because I think even in India, where you can argue that our
[Guest]: freedoms are severely restricted in many spheres, there's always been some amount of intellectual
[Guest]: support for the idea of, you know, your social and personal freedoms, about speech, about,
[Guest]: you know, your right to live your life the way you want to, where you live, where you
[Guest]: work, etc.
[Guest]: But the idea of economic freedoms somehow has never become very important in the Indian
[Guest]: political landscape or in the public imagination.
[Guest]: Why do you think that is?
[Guest]: I mean, why is there no public support for increasing the freedom for us to engage in
[Guest]: the business that we want to buy what we want and to sell what we want?
[Amit Varma]: Because we build narratives that separate them.
[Amit Varma]: For example, it is common for the left to support all the personal freedoms that you
[Amit Varma]: and I support, but oppose free markets and on various different reasons and say, no,
[Amit Varma]: the government needs to regulate this or the government needs to regulate that and get
[Amit Varma]: in the way of voluntary interactions there.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, on the other side, you know, the right will might pay lip service to free
[Amit Varma]: market.
[Amit Varma]: Though in India, we've never had an economic right.
[Amit Varma]: In India, every single government, including the current Narendra Modi government, is a
[Amit Varma]: far left government, which does not believe in economic freedoms.
[Amit Varma]: But the right doesn't believe in personal freedoms in India also in terms of free speech
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it's because this sort of narrative of left and right has been imposed upon us, or
[Amit Varma]: this narrative today of nationalist versus liberal, which is a ridiculous binary as well.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is that these narratives, to me make no sense.
[Amit Varma]: You know, looking at the world in terms of left wing and right wing is nonsensical, especially
[Amit Varma]: in India, where there is really no left wing when it comes to no right wing when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to economic freedom, everything is left.
[Amit Varma]: But the way I prefer to look at the world is more in terms of freedom and in terms of
[Amit Varma]: freedom and coercion, you know, authoritarian and libertarian, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: And using these terms is problematic because people associate terms like liberal and even
[Amit Varma]: libertarian today has become a tarnished term because, you know, people who call themselves
[Amit Varma]: libertarian in America, some of them have, you know, gone over to the alt right and there
[Amit Varma]: will be people who call themselves libertarian here who have said they support Modi, which
[Amit Varma]: is absurd to me.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it doesn't make any sense because, hey, consent, coercion, you know, those principles.
[Amit Varma]: So now I'm known as a libertarian and that's what people call me and I wish there was some
[Amit Varma]: other label.
[Amit Varma]: But the truth is that I just go back to first principles all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, everything for me comes down to being against coercion and giving importance
[Amit Varma]: to consent.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I want to bring, broach upon another topic that's related, where, you know, no matter
[Guest]: what values you believe in, there is some sort of a locus of identity that is there
[Guest]: in part of any philosophical outlook, right?
[Guest]: So for example, the communists think of the worker and a collective of the workers as
[Guest]: an entity and sort of focus on, you know, how they can be benefited best.
[Guest]: You know, people who believe in Hindutva think about the larger Hindu population as one somewhat
[Guest]: monolithic community, which needs to be given special importance to.
[Guest]: In that sense, what would you focus on?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I absolutely abhor identity politics of any kind, whether it is on the left or
[Amit Varma]: the right, which is why, you know, in their ways of looking at the world, I don't find
[Amit Varma]: the bhakts very different from the woks.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they're dividing the world into categories and identities and somebody is
[Amit Varma]: an enemy and someone's a friend and there is oppression somewhere and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: The truth is, as the old cliche goes, the smallest minority is an individual.
[Amit Varma]: So I look at everything from the point of view of every individual.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you can and one binary that is true and is not a false binary is group rights
[Amit Varma]: and individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: You can either believe in group rights or individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: If you believe in group rights and if you say that we should think of people in terms
[Amit Varma]: of groups and look for their welfare and so on, then you are necessarily ignoring individual
[Amit Varma]: rights, you know, and that's a problem to me.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we need to go beyond identity and think in terms of individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, some might argue that, look, identity politics has dominated the world
[Amit Varma]: so far.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to protest a certain kind of identity politics, how do you do that without getting
[Amit Varma]: into identity politics?
[Amit Varma]: And my reply to that always is that you do that by fighting for individual rights, by
[Amit Varma]: insisting on individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: That's the only way you do it, to not think at the level of the individual is to then
[Amit Varma]: condescend to every individual and say that, no, I won't see you for yourself, you're part
[Amit Varma]: of a group.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the sins of your group must be visited upon you.
[Amit Varma]: And if we wish to give special privileges to the group, which will, of course, be coercively
[Amit Varma]: taken from somewhere else, then that comes to you as well and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's a dangerous way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: I think it perpetuates hatred and ill will within communities and within groups.
[Amit Varma]: And right.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I think that identity politics is one of the things that is really wrong with
[Amit Varma]: our political discourse today.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I think it's quite a bit more useful to think in terms of interests rather than identities,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So, for example, you know, you follow a keto diet.
[Guest]: So therefore, you have an interest in ensuring that, I don't know, the right kind of meats
[Guest]: are available across the country.
[Guest]: Somebody else might have a different interest, somebody likes to run every day.
[Guest]: So you know, you might have an interest in having adequate infrastructure for running.
[Guest]: So so in that sense, interests are multiple and people can align themselves differently
[Guest]: in the political space with just interests, right.
[Guest]: So because I mean, it's not right to wish interests away.
[Guest]: But the idea is to sort of try and move away from compulsory identities that are imposed
[Amit Varma]: on groups of people.
[Amit Varma]: That's very well said.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very wise.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't have said it better.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you entirely.
[Amit Varma]: Look, all of us have different interests and all of us voluntarily can do whatever we want,
[Amit Varma]: as long as there's no coercion involved.
[Amit Varma]: So, for example, you know, I'm in Mumbai, you're in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: And every time I go to Bangalore, I'm blown away because you have such a nice keto community
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: You have so many keto options.
[Amit Varma]: I have less of them in Bombay and and therefore it stands to reason that I would want to sort
[Amit Varma]: of convert more people to keto.
[Amit Varma]: I say convert like it's a religion, but it's not.
[Amit Varma]: It's the only healthy way of living.
[Amit Varma]: But so bring bring people around to my point of view.
[Amit Varma]: But it should not at any point involve coercion.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't even mind if you think in terms of identities, because as long as there
[Amit Varma]: is no coercion involved anywhere else, and as long as you're not demonizing another class
[Amit Varma]: of people entirely or shutting them up.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I think we've sort of circled around this, but can you walk us through how all is liberty
[Guest]: important or how is it being infringed in India today?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So in 2018, we are sort of here after a decade of high economic growth, a couple of decades
[Guest]: of some economic and personal freedoms being loosened.
[Guest]: But at the same time, there are new threats coming in, right?
[Amit Varma]: I don't even know where to begin because our freedoms are infringed in so many ways.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, there is a myth that we have a liberal constitution in the good sense of
[Amit Varma]: the word liberal, but I'm not sure we do.
[Amit Varma]: Our constitution doesn't really protect free speech, for example, because Article 19A and
[Amit Varma]: it pays lip service to free speech, but it also lays out all these caveats like decency,
[Amit Varma]: public order, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And because of those caveats, we have old IPC laws that the British made to control
[Amit Varma]: us like 295A and 153A, which essentially clamped down on free speech.
[Amit Varma]: And there's nothing we can do about them.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's, for example, unbelievable and shocking that in 2018, 377 is still on the
[Amit Varma]: cards.
[Amit Varma]: And we are saying that an entire sexual orientation is effectively illegal.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that kind of sex is illegal.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't say that being homosexual per se is illegal, but effectively, that's what 377
[Amit Varma]: does.
[Amit Varma]: And it's unbelievable that in 2018, we should be in that kind of situation.
[Amit Varma]: And equally in terms of economic freedom, I mean, first you look at, you look at two
[Amit Varma]: aspects of what the government does to us.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, in the economic sphere, number one, you look at what they take from us.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, taxation is much higher than it should be, both indirect and direct.
[Amit Varma]: And that's because the government spends a lot more on useless things than it should.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, our government is a large but weak state where it should be a small but strong
[Amit Varma]: state.
[Amit Varma]: It should be small, but the areas it is small in, like law and order, like defense, it should
[Amit Varma]: be strong.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, it is weak in those areas.
[Amit Varma]: And it does a hundred other things where it is basically a parasite state, figuring out
[Amit Varma]: ways to sort of suck blood from the people.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know that sounds dramatic, but that's really what it is.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's again, if you're paying one third of your income in taxes, you're basically
[Amit Varma]: a slave to the government for four months of the year.
[Amit Varma]: There's no other way of looking at that.
[Amit Varma]: And as we've argued before, some amount of that may be necessary.
[Amit Varma]: But to me, it would be a fraction of the amount that we're giving out now.
[Amit Varma]: That's one aspect, what the government takes from you.
[Amit Varma]: And so on, the other aspect in the economic sphere is all the many infringements on the
[Amit Varma]: economic freedoms of citizens, all the interference that it does in markets.
[Amit Varma]: For example, look at the state of our poor farmers.
[Amit Varma]: You look at the state of our farmers now, 71 years after independence, and it makes
[Amit Varma]: you want to cry.
[Amit Varma]: And why is it like this?
[Amit Varma]: It's like this because our farmers have been trapped in farming by bad policy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'd encourage listeners to, you know, go to seen unseen.in and look at the very
[Amit Varma]: first episode of the scene in the unseen, where you were one of my guests along with
[Amit Varma]: Karthik Sheshadar and we discussed agricultural reforms.
[Amit Varma]: And in various ways, you know, farmers are not allowed markets in any aspect, how they
[Amit Varma]: get their produce, where they sell their produce, you know, in terms of pricing or anything
[Amit Varma]: that kept in a constant state of dependency.
[Amit Varma]: They can't sell agricultural land for non agricultural purposes.
[Amit Varma]: So they can't even escape, you know, a few episodes back in the scene in the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: my guest Shruti Rajgopalan had spoken about this being one of the ways in which the caste
[Amit Varma]: system perpetuates itself, because people find it hard to simply escape physically,
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And agriculture is, of course, the most egregious example.
[Amit Varma]: And it's somewhere where, you know, in 91, there were no reforms that touched agriculture
[Amit Varma]: or touch factor markets and large parts of the country are still hugely poor for that.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, this link isn't direct, this link isn't obvious.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if if you ask a farmer himself, that what do you want from the government,
[Amit Varma]: and he's in desperate states, and he'll say, Oh, I want a farm loan waiver, which is all
[Amit Varma]: well and good.
[Amit Varma]: But a farm loan waiver basically traps a farmer in his current state of poverty, quite apart
[Amit Varma]: from the fact that you have, it's also paid for by other people, you know, I'm like, government
[Amit Varma]: does so many things I shouldn't do, like run businesses, run banks, I mean, who is paying
[Amit Varma]: for need of Modi power, you and I are paying for need of Modi's and Vijay Mallya's theft,
[Amit Varma]: which is the only word for it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a theft that has happened in collusion with the government.
[Amit Varma]: There's no way around it directly or indirectly.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, there's hardly anything I can not complain about.
[Amit Varma]: But what makes me most sad is that this is not in the public discourse, I you know, I'm
[Amit Varma]: a completely lonely voice in the public discourse.
[Amit Varma]: This is people are not questioning all these fundamental things about the government, the
[Amit Varma]: mindset that the government is a solution to everything, even when the government has
[Amit Varma]: actually created the problem in the first place, is embedded in people, the you know,
[Amit Varma]: the mindset of the MyBab government is embedded.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you think about, you know, just one example, which, you know, got a lot
[Amit Varma]: of public heat in the last few years, people talk so much about corruption.
[Amit Varma]: And if you think about corruption, what causes corruption, it's discretion, you give a set
[Amit Varma]: of people power over other people, they will use that power.
[Amit Varma]: Because power corrupts, they will make money.
[Amit Varma]: And yet the solution that most well meaning people come up with is, oh, you, the solution
[Amit Varma]: is more government, that you have a Jan Lokpal or you have a, you know, another committee
[Amit Varma]: over the hundred committees already there.
[Amit Varma]: And that doesn't help anything that adds to the problem.
[Amit Varma]: To solve the problem, what you need to do is you need to take away power from the government
[Amit Varma]: and give it back to the citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how you solve that particular problem.
[Amit Varma]: And people don't have a consciousness of this, they keep looking at the government as a solution
[Amit Varma]: to everything.
[Amit Varma]: And, and I feel really sad about that, and I wish there was some way I could make these
[Amit Varma]: ideas a little more popular.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe this podcast will help, who knows.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: But, you know, I've seen that, you know, people often have different fears, and often that
[Guest]: is also reflective of their philosophies, right.
[Guest]: So for example, if someone's a someone believes in, say, communism in India today, they might
[Guest]: probably fear, I don't know, they might fear religion and the religious identity as a source
[Guest]: of violence.
[Guest]: They might fear, I don't know, big corporations coming and doing nasty things.
[Guest]: So in that sense, is there a fear that is important to you?
[Amit Varma]: Can you rephrase that?
[Guest]: I mean, what fear exactly?
[Guest]: Like a fear of a very large government in a sense, a fear of people taking violence
[Guest]: into their own hands.
[Guest]: But I mean, I know that it's a slightly negative way of looking at everything.
[Guest]: But there are often certain deep seated fears or concerns that motivate us, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because you know why?
[Amit Varma]: Because the government hasn't done its basic job of providing a rule of law and from saving
[Amit Varma]: us from these fears is a one fundamental role of the government, that, you know, if he knew
[Amit Varma]: that the government always will look after our rights and the rule of law will be maintained
[Amit Varma]: and my free speech will always be protected, then I would not fear anything.
[Amit Varma]: But if it doesn't do that, then, of course, different groups in different places will
[Amit Varma]: fear things.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the Hindutva people who value their religion will fear that communism will erode
[Amit Varma]: away their traditions or left liberals will fear that, you know, the Hindutva parties
[Amit Varma]: will impose their views on the rest of the country, including them.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that those fears are taken care of if there is a rule of law and if the
[Amit Varma]: government is strong enough and if the constitution provides enough safeguards, then they don't
[Amit Varma]: need to fear.
[Amit Varma]: Then the Hindus can celebrate their culture and the liberals can have the freedom that
[Amit Varma]: they should have and everybody's happy.
[Amit Varma]: But the government doesn't do its job at a fundamental level.
[Amit Varma]: So people have these fears and you name big corporations.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to kind of address another point that, you know, people often demonize free
[Amit Varma]: markets by saying, oh, but then big corporations will take over and they will run the country
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But the truth is that big corporations hate free markets.
[Amit Varma]: What big corporations really want is their turf to be protected, which is why, for example,
[Amit Varma]: just before independence, when Nehru asked a group of industrialists, and this was famously
[Amit Varma]: known as the Bombay Club or the Bombay Plan, I forget which, to suggest what should be
[Amit Varma]: done for the country, they wholeheartedly suggested what he was going to do anyway,
[Amit Varma]: which was a closed economy, because that would protect them.
[Amit Varma]: So people don't get that free markets and companies are on two opposite ends of the
[Amit Varma]: spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: So what happens is a free market, the way I define it, is a market where all voluntary
[Amit Varma]: interactions are protected by the government.
[Amit Varma]: There is the rule of law, whereas what you often see in crony capitalism or crony socialism
[Amit Varma]: or cronyism, to put it simply, rather than get into an argument, is that you have a very
[Amit Varma]: powerful government which uses its power to benefit big corporations, whether it's the
[Amit Varma]: Reliances or the Adanis or whatever, whatever you choose to believe in, but benefit different
[Amit Varma]: big corporations in different ways, and not allow incumbents to come up, not allow the
[Amit Varma]: guy at the bottom of the ladder the economic freedom that he deserves, while taking his
[Amit Varma]: money and redistributing it to richie-riches at the top, like the Nirav Modi's and the
[Amit Varma]: Vijay Mallya's.
[Amit Varma]: So big companies are not synonymous with free markets, they're in fact the very opposite.
[Amit Varma]: Free markets basically mean every common citizen of this country being able to voluntarily
[Amit Varma]: interact with anybody he wants to in any way, provided there is no coercion and provided,
[Amit Varma]: to get back to that magic word, there is consent all around.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: So, Amit, given that liberty and the values around consent and freedom are sort of reducing
[Guest]: right now, at least in most parts of the world, is there anything that you are optimistic
[Guest]: about?
[Guest]: Is there anything that makes you hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: I think what makes me optimistic to some extent is a technology.
[Amit Varma]: I think technology empowers individuals where political struggles haven't.
[Amit Varma]: For example, commuters in all Indian cities have suffered for a long time because of scarcities
[Amit Varma]: of public transport, because the government provided public transport is so bad, and because
[Amit Varma]: you have the government interfering in public transport in terms of limiting the licenses
[Amit Varma]: given to taxis and auto rickshaws and blah blah.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're in Delhi, for example, you would never go anywhere by meter, you would have
[Amit Varma]: to negotiate a price with the guy.
[Amit Varma]: In Bombay, sometimes a guy would just refuse to come where you want to.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly, bang, technology came in terms of these app based services like Uber and
[Amit Varma]: Ola and empowered individuals.
[Amit Varma]: You know, now I don't need to worry at all about getting a transport at any time of the
[Amit Varma]: day to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just giving you one small example.
[Amit Varma]: So in many ways, there is a hope that technology will empower individuals in ways that ironically
[Amit Varma]: political struggles have failed to do, but also going beyond that, I take courage from
[Amit Varma]: Martin Luther King's words to paraphrase him that you know, but the arc of history, and
[Amit Varma]: I think the arc of history, one would hope does bend towards freedom right now you have
[Amit Varma]: a lot of populism in the world and you have guys like Trump and Modi and Erdogan and so
[Amit Varma]: on in charge, but one hopes that in the long run, citizens will express themselves more
[Amit Varma]: and fight more, which I think is happening to some extent, and that they will be empowered
[Amit Varma]: by technology.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, it cuts both ways.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we can talk forever about all the trade offs involved.
[Amit Varma]: And many of these things are unknown unknowns, you know, you and I can't possibly imagine
[Amit Varma]: what the politics of the future and the technology of the future even 10 years from now will
[Amit Varma]: look like is beyond our imagination.
[Guest]: But we can hope for the best.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: Thanks so much for coming in Amit and about sharing values and making me think about consent
[Guest]: a lot more than I used to before.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed this conversation, I'd urge you to listen to more episodes of the Pragati
[Amit Varma]: podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to the site I edit Pragati at thinkpragati.com and click on the podcast
[Amit Varma]: tab.
[Amit Varma]: I'll join you again next week on the seen and the unseen from the familiar interviewer's
[Amit Varma]: chair.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And you can browse past episodes of the seen and the unseen at seen unseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: He bends down to test the warm water for his bath.
[Unknown]: He comes here to quench his thirst for a hot shower and some podcasts.
[Unknown]: You can witness how he enjoys having other people talk about cool stuff in his bathroom.
[Unknown]: Indeed, it helps him with his loneliness.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcast.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening.